The Sentro ng Wikang Filipino, also known as SWF or Sentro (English: Center for the Filipino Language) is a language academy, research center, and university-based publishing house that is part of the University of the Philippines System (UP). It has offices in various autonomous universities of UP System, the most notable of which is the one housed at the University of the Philippines Diliman (i.e. SWF-Diliman) that won the National Book Award for Publisher of the Year by the Manila Critics' Circle.
The Sentro is active not just within the UP system due to its mission of "developing and disseminating" the Filipino language according to the provisions of the the Philippines 1987 Constitution.[1][2]
The Philippine Constitution of 1987 is the current Constitution of the Philippines adopted under the direction of Corazon Aquino.
This replaced the Philippine Consitution of 1973 which was adopted during the precidency of Ferdinand Marcos.
Following the EDSA Revolution of 1986 that overthrew Ferdinand Marcos and following his inauguration, Aquino declared Proclamation No. 3 in March 1986 declaring national policy to implement reforms proposed by the people, caring for their fundamental rights, accepting a temporary constitution and providing a proper translation of a government under the new constitution.
President Aquino later released the Proclamation No. 9 which creates a constitutional commission (abbreviated "Con-Com") to formulate a new constitution that will replace the 1973 Constitution adopted during martial law under the Marcos regime.
Aquino appoints 50 members of the commission.
Its members are drawn from various fields including several former lawmakers, the former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines Roberto Concepcion, a Catholic bishop, and the director of the film Lino Brocka.
Aquino also appointed 5 members, including former Minister of Labor, Blas Ople, who was formerly Marcos's ally until it was overthrown.
After the commission, the president elected Cecilia Muñoz-Palma, who was identified as a key figure in Marcos's opposition to Marcos following the retirement of Muñoz-Palma as the first female companion magistrate of the Supreme Court of the Philippines.
The commission concluded the draft document within four months after it was assembled.
Some of the issues are hotly debated in sessions including the form of government to take, dismantling the death penalty, the ongoing maintenance of the United States military base in Clark and Subic, and the integration of economic policies in constitution.
Brocka left the commission before its completion and two other delegates objected to its final draft.
ConCom completed his work on October 12, 1986 and presented the draft constitution to President Corazon Aquino on October 15, 1986.
After the national information campaign stage, a plebiscite for its ratification was held on February 2, 1987.
More than 3/4 or 76.37% of voters (17,059,495 voters) voted for it and 22.65% (5,058,714 voters) voted against the adoption.
On February 11, 1987, the new constitution was proclaimed to be adopted and enforced.
On the same day, Corazon Aquino, other government officials and Armed Forces of the Philippines have sworn allegiance to the constitution.
Philippine Constitution of 1987
Nominations
